MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Some things
you can tell [AUDIO OUT] 30,
31.
And his children-- and
the children are bap--
INTERVIEWER 1: Baptized.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Baptized,
baptized, so they are,
can be Christian.
But my elder daughter
was in the Jewish Matrik.
She got the-- the star,
too, and she was--
in the internation
camp for children.
INTERVIEWER 2: OK.
Now, wait a second.
What's this?
That's for both children or one?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No.
For the Jewish child.
Says she is Jewish.
INTERVIEWER 2: You will show
them when you speak about them.
Are we-- what else do
we want to mention?
Are you ready?
OK.
Now we'll begin.
Bonnie will ask you
most of the questions.
I'll be mostly silent.
And begin with your name,
where you were born, what time.
And see through your
own-- like if a film
would be rolling in
front of you, look at it
and tell us what you see.
Do you understand
what I'm saying?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: Just--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Do I
have to look in this?
INTERVIEWER 2: Yeah.
Yes.
OK, why don't we begin.
INTERVIEWER 1: Would you tell us
your name, when you were born?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: My
name is Martha Saraffian.
My maiden name is Kummermann.
I was born in Prague
in September 15, 1907.
And we moved to the Sudeten.
At this time, it was Austria.
It was not Sudeten.
We moved there in 1909.
And we lived there 30
years before the German--
before the German take over.
Then we-- we--
were-- first, my
parents were leaving.
And my husband was
not Jewish, and--
INTERVIEWER 1: Could
we just hold a minute
and tell us a little
bit about your family?
Who were the members of
your family, a little bit
about your early life.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
My-- my-- my parents have a
factory for linen and cotton
and we had big house.
And my sister died before
the concentration camp.
And my parents fled in 19--
beginning of 1938 to another
town in Czechoslovakia.
INTERVIEWER 1: Um, can
you tell us a little bit,
was this your only sister?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
It was my only sister.
She died before--
INTERVIEWER 2: Can
you describe the home?
Was it religious?
What kind of customs?
What was a day like, or a--
or a holiday, or a--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No.
My parents were religious
and we had a kosher home.
And then even-- we were very
attached one to the other.
We lived one from the other.
And it was very
hard for me when I--
I married a man that was no Jew.
My father didn't
talk to me one year.
And when I married, my
mother took the suitcase
and went away, and I and my
father was in the office.
Only my sister went with
me with the lawyer to the--
what you call it,
where we were married.
And then it took a long time
before my parents got used to--
when my first child was born.
So they say, we are very happy.
But they wanted that she be
Jewish and said what we did.
INTERVIEWER 1: Can you
tell us a little bit
about your early life, how
you spent your time, what
the weekends were like,
what your thoughts were
about the future for yourself
and your family, what
you thought you might
do when you grow up?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah.
I-- I was-- my father sent--
sent us to France to learn--
to learn French.
And I learned millinery, and
my daughter was studying--
my sister was
studying in French.
And we went off to Prague and
even to Austria, to Vienna.
We had really a nice youth.
My father was well off and we--
he wanted that we learn--
I was also in Germany in
business school one year.
And, uh, then-- a-and I
had the millinery diploma
I made in small business.
In my father's house,
he gave me two rooms.
And I had--
I made-- I had three girls
employed and I made these hats.
Not-- not--
I didn't must to do
it, but I liked it.
And then when I met my
husband and I married,
so I gave up the business and
we moved in a nice apartment.
We had-- when my
daughter was born,
we had the dog
and bird and the--
we had the housekeeper.
It was really a nice life.
We had a car and sometimes
we went by car to Vienna.
And really, it was a nice life.
INTERVIEWER 1: Did you
give up your millinery,
for what reason?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Because
my husband didn't want--
he earned enough money.
He didn't want that I work
because I had the child.
And I help sometimes in my
father's office, typing,
when he needed.
INTERVIEWER 2: How did
you meet your husband
and what was his business?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: He was an
importer for Persian carpets.
He was an Armenian.
He came to Germany, with
a transport, children.
What-- what were left
after a massacre.
When the Turks massacred
the Armenians, he came to--
to Germany.
With an-- it's like a self-help
organization what brought
this children to Germany.
He came there with about
four sisters and brothers.
He never saw them again
because they were all
placed in another foster home.
So he-- he searched,
but he didn't get any--
he didn't see any of his family.
Only one uncle was in Köln am
Rhein and he had the business
with stamps.
That was the only
connection he got.
And he was alone and
he told me this story.
He brought me these books
from Fridtjof Nansen.
He was helping these
Armenian immigrants and said,
I had an other book.
It was named--
Ein Volk in Not--
uh, "People in-- in--" what
you call it-- "in Need."
Say-- say, it was like--
like we, Jews.
They were deported
and they were killed,
and what was left, went
and transport to Europe.
And so he-- he was--
he was not a happy person
because he had nobody.
And I-- I liked him and
I was moved by his story,
and so we got together.
And uh, my parents
didn't want to allow it.
They sent me to
Berlin to forget it.
I had a cousin in Berlin.
He studied rabbi and he
should to talk me out
of this marriage.
But he didn't.
He said that must, must decide,
I only, and if I want to do it
or not.
And my-- my parents
were very unhappy.
And I didn't marry because
my grandmother died
and my mother said to me, she
died because she was so unhappy
that I want to marry this man.
But she died, I
think, from old age.
But I felt very guilty about.
From this time, I--
I-- I waited a long time.
My father was very sick.
He was one year in a
hospital in Prague.
And I went with him
always by-- by ambulance.
I was sitting the
whole day, it seemed.
He didn't talk to me.
So then when he came
back home, so I married.
He was better and he
went in the office again.
And so later, I married,
and it worked out
when my daughter was born.
And then when my husband
saved my parents money,
because he had money that
my parents should get from--
from clients, my
husband collected it
and went night over the
custom with the suitcase.
And inside, he had the money.
INTERVIEWER 1: Was this when
the Germans were already
in Czechoslovakia?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
Yes.
When it was occupied.
Then my parents were very,
very thankful to my husband.
So the whole thing
was straightened out.
INTERVIEWER 1: Your father could
no longer collect his own fees,
is that--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No.
He left.
He left before-- before I left.
He left about, uh,
half year, one year
before l left, with my mother.
They left all and went
to a brother from my--
my father.
And then my father got sick
again so they went in the spa
and lived in a hotel.
And when my husband brought him
only they rented the apartment.
And we left after--
after-- I left after
the Grynszpan affair,
if you heard
something from this.
Uh, a Jew in Germany named
Grynszpan, he killed a German.
And then it breaks out in
Czechoslovakia, this transport.
And after-- after we left--
we left, uh, to the spa
where my parents were.
And--
INTERVIEWER 1: This-- excuse me.
This spa that was in
Czechoslovakia proper?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: In other words,
you left the Sudetenland?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: We left the
Sudeten and went in this spa.
INTERVIEWER 1: Were there--
what-- what was the
story in the Sudetenland
when-- when you left.
What was happening there?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: When the
German came in the first day,
they--
they broke in their
houses from the Jews.
They broke the door
from my parents' house.
They took out everything
they find in--
in the shelves, in
the closets, in--
in the drawers, in the offices.
Every single was on the
floor, it was high like this.
From the wall, pictures.
And from this handles
from brass, everything.
What they could
damage, they did.
It was like the same
like the Russian
did after they are in
Czechoslovakia, and in German,
the same thing.
My husband went to the
officer Leut-Leutnant.
INTERVIEWER 2: That's
1938 or '39 now?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: '38.
And asked them,
how it's possible
that you do something like this?
And he said, that's
the martial law.
Kriegsrecht.
INTERVIEWER 2: Martial law.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
And so we couldn't
do nothing about.
And my husband
always said, nothing
can happen to us
because I'm not Jewish.
But then when the
Grynszpan appair--
affair came, say-- say
we're like animals.
They hit an old Jew, throwing
all over on the place, on the--
on the-- from the
town, the big place,
say, throw these Jews around
that everybody see it.
INTERVIEWER 1: Can you
explain that to us?
How-- did you see this happen?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No, no.
I didn't go in the street
anymore because they harassed
my maid, if she come
out with a Jewish child,
they will hurt her.
So my husband said, you don't
go out in the street anymore.
And then the Gestapo
came in our house
and took my husband
till he got--
till he got from
Vienna the confirmation
that he's not a Jew, because
he lived long time in Vienna.
And-- and then
after they got it,
they let him out of the prison.
And so then he realized
the danger and he--
he said, you must
go out from here.
So we had a car and the
driver took me over there,
over the custom
with my daughter.
And my husband came.
My husband went to Berlin
and asked for permission
to move our belongings
to the Czechoslovakia.
And he got the permission.
And then he packed everything.
He sold his business
and then take him over.
And we took an apartment
and we lived there.
INTERVIEWER 2: What town?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
It was Podiebrad.
It was his spa, where
my parents were.
INTERVIEWER 2: So you really
left what was now Germany?
Or occupied Sudetenland,
which was Germany.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes, it was.
Then when they occupy,
the time after they--
they called it "Protektorat
Böhmen and Mähren"
INTERVIEWER 2: And you went
back into Czechoslovakia proper?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
And there begun the-- the--
the transport with the Jews
because they made their head
from Czechoslovakia Heydrich.
His name was Heydrich.
And he let kill a whole town
from Czechs, men, women,
and children.
The whole town was
killed and damaged
because he had such a hatred.
They were against--
against the German,
or something happened that
he let kill all in this town.
And one--
INTERVIEWER 2: Did the Czech--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: One
Czech killed him in Prague
in a church.
No, some other place,
but he hided in a church,
but they find him and
they kill him, too.
And from this time,
the-- the worst transport
was name Heydrich Transport.
And this transport, my mother--
my father died before,
cancer, and he--
he could not be in a
hospital where everybody
was because he was a Jew.
So they gave him in
the infection hospital.
So when he died, then my
mother was caught in transport.
And--
INTERVIEWER 1: Can you tell
us a little about that,
about what happened
to your mother?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: It
was the worst transport.
They survived only
10 person from this.
Thousands of people
that went to Majdanek.
My mother was
shipped to Majdanek.
And she-- she--
what I heard from--
from a survivor when he--
INTERVIEWER 1: Can you start
a little bit earlier and tell
us what exactly happened?
Where she was, when it
happened, where you were?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
I was in a hospital
because I just got
my second child.
And my mother, five day
after my child was born,
my mother went in transport.
And she was first
going to Kolín,
that massive town from where
they shipped all the Jews
to camps.
First to Theresienstadt,
and from there, via--
via Lublin to Majdanek.
And my mother was
in this transport.
It was the worst.
And I was told from a
survivor, that the Jews
had to run in circles.
And the SS men shoot--
the SA, the young
men, they were--
what you call it-- an
organization, SA and SS,
SS were worse than SA.
But they ordered the
children, 10 to 15 years old,
to shoot the Jews.
They had to run in circles
and they shoot them.
Some were wounded, so they
shoot them again till they died.
But one men, he said to me,
I was alive and I resisted.
When it was dark, I was
under the-- the deads.
So I crawled out
and I saved my life.
But there were very,
very little when
I heard from the Red Cross.
Said to him there were
10 person only survivors.
Later, I met in Prague this
man that told me what happened.
INTERVIEWER 1: Did you
see your mother go?
Were you at home
when she went away?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No,
I was in the hospital.
I didn't see her.
She come-- she came
to me the last day.
I had the watch.
I give her the watch.
It was not a golden watch.
It was to hang on.
And I give her this watch and
she gave me her gold watch.
And I-- we--
we-- she gave all her
jewel to a Czech to--
to hide.
And this-- this Czech gave
nothing back to-- to us.
And my-- my jewelery, our
pastor in this spa, he--
he put it in--
in three cases in the soil
in his-- in his garden, all
our jewelry.
And I got it back.
I never claimed it
because I got it back.
But this pastor was--
he had so much Jews that he was
picked up from the Gestapo--
Gestapo, and got imprisoned.
But his wife was
from Switzerland
and she got him out.
But he helped very
much the Jews.
INTERVIEWER 1: When--
when your mother
came to see you at the
hospital the last day,
did she know that she was
going to be on a transport?
Did you know that she was
going to be going the next day?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah.
She said to me, we
go to transport.
Maybe tomorrow,
maybe the next day.
I didn't see her anymore.
INTERVIEWER 1: What did you
think when she told you?
What would you feel
when she told you
what was going to happen?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: It was
a terrible experience.
But I said to her,
when it's God's will
so we can do nothing about.
And we couldn't.
We couldn't fight
because we were--
we were-- the Czechs were the
same, anti-Semites, like--
like the German maybe worse.
The Austrians were worse, too,
because we had in the camps
always Austrian
Scharführer and guides.
They were worse than the German.
And I don't know
where I stopped.
INTERVIEWER 1: You were--
you were in the hospital
having your second baby.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
And I was undernourished.
I-- I got skorbut because
I had not enough food.
And I got it all over my body,
these blue signs from skorbut.
And, uh--
INTERVIEWER 1: Scurvy?
Is that scurvy?
INTERVIEWER 2: Mm-hm.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
What-- what, uh--
what, uh, s-seafarers
have when they
have only one kind of food, no?
So-- and I had no milk.
I had only water.
So we had to send in
small farm for milk.
We sent a man every day.
My husband bought a bicycle
and sent this man every day
for milk for my child
because we didn't get much.
I got only this food cards.
I got one egg in
the month and meat--
no meat, no food, a little bit
flour and a little bit sugar.
And my husband got more and--
and my children, too.
The little one got one pound
of, uh, farina for a month.
So we had to--
INTERVIEWER 2: What is
special about this card?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
That-- that was
the card with the Jew on it.
It was given to Jews, but I
couldn't go and buy myself
because with this star, I was
not allowed to go in the store.
We got these stars, my
Jewish daughter and I.
And we had to carry all the--
through the end of the war.
INTERVIEWER 2: So
half of your family
was Jews and half not Jews?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: It was different.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
It was always--
my husband said it was
always this sword of Damocles
because he always
feared that my--
my Jewish daughter
will be attacked, too.
She-- she was with the star.
From the Czech children, they
bounce her on down the head
and told her always.
You are Jew.
You are a Jew.
And so she couldn't go
any more in this school.
She was one year older
when we left the De--
Sudeten.
She was only one
year in the school
since she couldn't go anymore.
And we lived there till
my daughter was two year,
three months old.
Then my husband was ordered to--
to town.
INTERVIEWER 2: What
year is it now?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: '39.
9, 10 of 19--
no.
INTERVIEWER 2: Back up.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
This was already '41.
And my husband was
ordered to this town.
And when the fire--
firefighters bombarded this
town because it was coal.
And they bombarded
everything that
was coal or electricity or--
or what they could
destroy, they--
the German couldn't use it.
So my husband was ordered
to clean up this, uh,
pieces that were flying.
And in the meantime, I got in--
INTERVIEWER 1: How did
he get to this place
where he did this work?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: He-- he
went by train several hours.
No-- no other communication.
It's this time because
it was already occupied
from-- from the chairman.
There were only trains.
The buses-- what-- what say--
say confiscated buses and
private cars, everything,
for them.
So they were only the
way to go by train.
INTERVIEWER 1: Did
he go by himself?
Did he go with--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No, all these
men that has Jewish woman.
All these Christian
men had Jewish women.
And then--
INTERVIEWER 2: Were
they special transport?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
And my husband asked
for permission.
When I sent a telegram, said,
I have to go in the camp,
in the labor camp,
with my daughter,
with my Jewish daughter.
And he-- he was so upset
that he asked his com--
commander to let him go.
And these men gave him
a pass to go through
and he came at night.
And when I told
him what happened,
he-- he took the next train
at 2 o'clock in the morning
and went to Prague.
The name was Sonnenbergstrasse,
where the Gestapo had the head
quarter.
And he was protesting.
He-- sent me with
just the child,
that they sent me with the
child to the labor camp
and when he was already
working for them.
But he-- he was
not received well.
He got in, as punishment,
in a special transport
to Germany in a truck
without food, without light.
About three, four men
got in this punish--
got this punishment.
So they didn't want to--
they was-- they offered to
divorce me so he could be free,
but he didn't want.
So he was transported
to Germany.
The name was Klettendorf.
They worked-- he
got this on his arm.
It means, Arbeitet, "work
for Organisation Todt."
And he was 11 hours in
bunkers working and carrying
these big pieces of
cement to the bunkers.
And he got really sick so
they gave him one egg a day.
And then when he recovered,
he got in another camp.
And from this second camp,
it was nearly the end.
He came to-- back
to Czechoslovakia.
A small camp where all these
men that marry Jewish woman
were in camp.
INTERVIEWER 1: What was
the name of that camp?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
Bistritz, Bistritz--
It was near Beneschau.
And this picture was handmade
from one of this men.
And he made postcards
from it for Christmas
and sent it to my
husband after the war.
So that's what I kept it
long time in the frame.
INTERVIEWER 1:
When you were still
in Podiebrad, what
was happening to you,
as far as your belongings
were concerned, as far as--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
We have-- I was
ordered to give up my--
my dog.
We had the bird.
We gave it before.
We gave it to friends.
But this dog I have to give up.
And my daughter was very
unhappy so we bought another dog
and kept our dog by a family
and gave up the other dog.
INTERVIEWER 2: Why did you
have to give up the dog?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
Because Jews were not
allowed to have an animal.
So then I was ordered
to give up all my--
my belongings, my fur coat,
my fur jacket, my fur head,
my fur--
all-- all what I have
from fur, from wool.
From being in Europe,
we had fur Fußsäcke.
How you--
INTERVIEWER 1: Slippers?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah.
INTERVIEWER 2: Stiefel.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah,
to slip in the feet,
or here when we go in the--
in the-- Schlitten --
INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, skating?
INTERVIEWER 2: Sleigh.
INTERVIEWER 1: Sledding?
INTERVIEWER 2: On the sleigh?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: It
were these horses, no.
So we had these fur sacks.
And then we had to give
up all what was mine.
My husband signed
it as his belongings
because he bought it,
but I had to give up
everything what was--
what they wanted to have.
And that's what I kept from
the Jewish organization,
with a seal from Czechoslovakia,
that I gave it up
to the German.
And then in the concentration
camp, in the labor camp--
INTERVIEWER 2: What
year were you--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
It was already '42.
And my daughter was in the--
in the children's camp.
And once, she ran
away and came to me.
INTERVIEWER 2: Do you remember
the names of the camp?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: The
name where my child--
child was Jesle, Jesle.
INTERVIEWER 1: And
the name of your camp?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Hagibor.
INTERVIEWER 1: What-- what
happened when you-- how
did you find out that you
had to go to the camp,
and how did that come about?
How did you get there?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: By
train at 4 o'clock
in the morning
because Jews, they're
not allowed to go
during the day by train.
So I had to take the train
with my daughter to Prague.
And from-- from there, we--
we were picked up from the
train and escorted to the camp.
And my daughter run
away and came to me
and they, they let her talk
to me for a few minutes,
but we couldn't talk.
We both cried.
And she was taken
away from me again.
And then after time, we--
I was, um, warding sick
people in this labor camp.
I cared for them.
There were many people.
One had this scarlatina and
one has with lung something.
So they needed help.
It was in the labor camp.
INTERVIEWER 1: This
was a certain building
in the labor camp where the
sick people were housed?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah, but
this was not where I worked.
It was one where sick
people was there.
There was one lady with
typhus and these sicknesses
in separate building.
Where I worked
there, not so sick.
But it was also a
woman with scarlatina.
And I didn't know it
either so I didn't--
I didn't fear.
INTERVIEWER 2: You didn't
know how infectious it was.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah.
I didn't know what he had.
I heard it after.
But-- so we--
we tried to help.
And the-- we were glad that we--
that our husbands
didn't divorce us
because there are cases
where the men divorced
when the woman was
already in the labor camp.
So he divorce her, and
she was immediately
shipped to Auschwitz
and she was killed.
And there were oft so
much cries and unhappiness
because it happens many times
that the Czech men divorced
the women.
INTERVIEWER 2: The Jewish women?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
The Jewish women.
INTERVIEWER 2: Your camp was
for women, Jewish women who
were married to non-Jews.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes, yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: Where
was your sm-- where
was your youngest daughter?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: She was by
a family in the same building
where we lived.
They took her during the war.
And when we came back, so we--
she didn't recognize me.
It took time before she
again got attached to me.
But she recognized my husband.
He came back earlier,
but he was very sick.
He couldn't walk.
He was so sick, and
bones and skin only.
INTERVIEWER 1: How
did that come about,
that she was taken care
of by another family?
And how old was she at the time?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: She was
two years and three months.
And we asked these
people if she--
if they would take care.
And they did.
We-- we left money for--
in advance for the--
for the child so she can
be taken good care of.
And they did it.
They had their own
child and she--
she was happy there.
But then the night
before I left,
I heard her crying because it
was above me, this apartment.
I heard her crying many hours.
INTERVIEWER 1: What was
your feeling about that?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: It was
terrible because she was hurt
and she was running and we
had such an Onyx Statue.
And it was-- it has four
corners and she fell
and hit her head on the
corner and she was bleeding.
And so in this, I left
her when she was so--
with pain, and she was
crying the whole night.
So they promised me to take
her to a doctor the next day.
Then I was-- from the
labor camp, I was--
we all were waked at 3
o'clock in the morning always.
What they did to us was
3 o'clock in the morning.
they ordered to be at 4 o'clock,
ready to go and transport
to Theresienstadt.
We were guided to--
to the train.
It was--
INTERVIEWER 1:
What year was this?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: It was '40--
the end of '43.
We were guided to the train.
And there, we stand
till 10 o'clock
in the morning in the cold
wind and melting snow.
Till 10 o'clock they left
us to go on the train.
INTERVIEWER 1: How
many of you were there?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: There was
1,000 women in this transport.
We were told not to move,
not to go to the window.
The-- the Austrian Scharführer
were always with a gun
in their hand, going up
and down and up and down.
We were always guarded.
And we arrived in the early
evening in Theresienstadt.
This was a fortress from 19--
from 1800.
It was built for military use.
Was a whole small town but
with two big fortresses.
One was the worst.
That would be the
people that came there
so they are beaten to death.
I had-- I had two
friends from our town
that were beaten to
death there because they
didn't want to say where
they left the money.
And I was ordered to--
when we came into
Theresienstadt,
we came in a long hole.
It was like a catacomb, no
windows, only long tables.
And on the tables, we have
to wait for this card.
We had no more name.
We got a number.
This-- my number
was 732 and my--
the transport number was R.
And the car's name was AE1.
That means labor
transport number 1.
And I was assigned to work in--
in the barrack
for we have to cut
stones, mica stones, big
stones that came from Sweden.
We had to cut it eight hours to,
with a knife for small pieces.
This is already broken.
It was isolation-- isolation
for the airplanes V--
V1 for the German
fi-fire-f-fighters.
INTERVIEWER 1: Ins-- uh,
do you mean insulation?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
Insulation, yeah,
for the fire-- fighter planes.
And so we had to make
five kilos in eight hours.
And who-- who didn't make
it didn't get their bread.
We had 350 gram.
That's about 3 and 1/2
deca for three days.
And who didn't make this five
kilos didn't get the bread.
INTERVIEWER 2: That's
about 12 ounces.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah,
I still not learn.
INTERVIEWER 2: 4 ounces a day.
Why did you keep--
how did you pick up
this piece of mica,
and what did you think
while you picked it
up and wanted to keep it?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: I
had more because then--
when we ha-- one
time, we had no--
not mica to cut.
So with these few pieces what
were left, I put it in my--
in my-- in this book.
INTERVIEWER 2: Why?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
Because it came--
the shipment from Sweden.
INTERVIEWER 2: No.
Why did you put it--
why did you keep it?
Why did you put it in your card?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: I
wanted to show it.
If I-- if I leave, I wanted
to show it to my husband.
And so I kept it.
I had more things, but it
got lost in this long time.
I had already Ghettogeld to
the Gestapo, when we came in,
they took from--
we were ordered in a big
room, I had the nerv--
nervous shock.
And the doctor kept me
till the last people--
we were 1,000 women.
And he kept me
with the last sick.
We went on stretchers inside.
So I was one of the last.
They took from us our pocket
books, our jewelry, our watch,
everything we had, money.
But we had-- they took--
took-- grabbed it back from
us and hurled it in a corner.
It was like a big--
like a big hill from
so many pocket books.
And then we were sent to a
small room, about 25, 50 women.
I don't know how many now.
And we were ordered to
take off our clothes
and with flashlights, men
looked if we have lice.
Then we were ordered
to a shower place.
We got a hot shower.
It was already night
and it was very cold.
They gave us a hot--
hot shower and a sheet.
And we had to go through an open
yard to another big building.
And then there are benches.
And then there we were sitting
till 3 o'clock in the morning
till they give our clothes back.
Then it was some little houses
there and we got in one room,
about four women.
And there were mattresses
on the floor, dirty, bloody,
and water was running
from the wall.
But then the next day, we
came in a bigger place, where
the mattresses were one
on top of the other,
and it was full of lice.
We couldn't sleep.
It was so terrible.
It was falling at-- at us.
It was a terrible place.
INTERVIEWER 1: You said
the mattresses were bloody?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes from
people killed or sick,
I don't know.
It was left for us because the
Jews were transported already
to Auschwitz to--
to Majdanek to Birkenau
to-- or at Dachau--
to all these places
where they had--
I had many family in-- in--
in the Theresienstadt.
One family with the
children already
had tuberculosis when they
were shipped to Birkenau,
and there, they died.
And the others were shipped to--
I heard it from survivors--
they were shipped to Dachau
and some to Auschwitz.
Nobody survived from my family.
I was the only one.
A few cousins left before
the war, one in Israel
and, uh, and other one left.
It was illegal on
a ship to Israel.
It was kept in Mauritius,
in the island Mauritius,
from the English.
And that was all what my--
was left for my family.
One cousin came back to
Prague, but he was so sick
that he didn't survive
longer than two years.
INTERVIEWER 1: What
happened-- when
you were sent to
Theresienstadt, what
happened to your older daughter
who was in the children's camp?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: When I
came to Theresienstadt,
we had to sign that we have
children and their religion.
And I was already in, so
I didn't fear for my head.
I feared for my daughter.
So I signed that my
children are Christian.
And I was not
punished, and maybe
didn't realize that I have
a Jewish child in the--
in the internation camp.
But this Jewish
child, the pastor
fought so much to get her
back and he got her back
and we took her in his house.
This pastor that was already
punished from the Gestapo,
helping Jews.
And he kept my daughter
till the end of the war.
INTERVIEWER 2: Do you
remember his name?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah.
He was the doctor--
professor doctor Josef Jeschke.
And he died a
couple of years ago.
I have his picture.
It was sent to me
from his children.
I have the picture from his
wife when she died before him.
And he kept always writing
me and I was writing him.
He was really an
outstanding man.
And I'm-- I said many
times to him, he gives so--
so good speeches in the church.
I sent my children in the
Sunday school with my husband.
And he-- I--
sometimes, when we
visit there in the spa,
I went to hear his speeches.
It was so outstanding
that I once
told him if I would not be a
Jew, and the Jew that really--
can't change even
in-- in need, I
wouldn't be able to
change my religion.
If I would be able, I would
change to your religion.
It was-- he was Protestant.
But he was really an outstanding
man and helping very much.
Then when we-- after the war,
he was really, very, very good
to us and my husband and
to my children and to me.
Give us a big
help, moral mentor.
And uh, in Theresienstadt, we--
we were-- I was
working on this mica.
We had to go three days
during the day and three days
at night in these
barracks to Bohusovice.
It was about a half hour
walk to-- to these barracks.
Their maid said that people
cannot see the exploitation
of Jews.
We worked there.
This was not a good work, a good
job, because the lights over us
and the sunlight and this--
this stone is shining.
And when you cut it, it's like--
like, uh, little silver stones.
We were all full of this.
We breathe it in.
And this was the
danger for the lungs.
That's why we got this job.
If it would be a good job, they
wouldn't have given it to us.
And it was a very sharp knife.
It was very-- we
often cut our fingers.
INTERVIEWER 1: You-- you had
to walk from Theresienstadt
to Bohusovice.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: What were
your thoughts as you were--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
We went always--
we passed the-- the
house where there--
this barrack where the deaths,
where what died there, or not
say, killed there.
They killed there.
They were in this mor--
mor-- mor--
INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm, morgue.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: And they took
them like this on the truck.
And I pass every
day and I was always
crying because I was thinking
maybe my mother is in between.
I didn't know that she
was shipped to Majdanek.
So a lady said to me,
if you cry every day,
you wouldn't see your
children anymore.
So soon, I stopped crying.
And I worked.
And I-- I had my shoes so--
so soaked from this wet
snow that I give my bread
to a Hollandaise
woman for shoes.
She had a pair of shoes
that she didn't need,
so she gave it to me for bread.
And this bread, I have to
steal from the labor camp.
And they didn't take it
from me, was like this.
And she was so glad
she got this bread,
so I was glad I had dry shoes.
INTERVIEWER 2: In that labor
camp, what kind of labor
was it?
Before Theresienstadt?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: We-- we went,
always after the transport,
to packing.
That's what we did before the
labor camp and from the camp,
too, to pack these belongings
from the transports in baskets.
The German took
everything to Germany.
INTERVIEWER 1: Uh, whose
belongings were these?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: From the Jews.
But they-- everybody took
something with him, no.
So they kept everything.
INTERVIEWER 2: So these--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: They got--
they got these,
um, these dresses.
INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: With,
uh, Sträflingskleidung.
INTERVIEWER 1: Mhm.
The stripes, the prison uniform.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Not me.
Me treated as mixed marriages.
We didn't get this.
We could use our clothes.
But not the Jews.
INTERVIEWER 2: The-- the
clothing, or the belongings,
came back from Auschwitz
from Majdanek to your camp.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: The-- the--
the people that survived
came back to Theresienstadt.
INTERVIEWER 2: No,
I'm asking you about--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No, no.
Not these clothes.
The clothing from the
Czechoslovak Jews.
Only from the Czechoslovak Jews.
There were many, you know, other
than Jews from Czechoslovakia,
but not went out before went
into the concentration camp.
Because many from these
small towns didn't know what
happened.
They were picked
up and they didn't
know what happened to them.
I didn't know.
My husband always said
that I'm indolent I
don't read newspapers.
I don't hear the radio.
So I didn't know what happened.
It was the spa and I had my--
my child.
I had enough to do.
They didn't allow me a maid and
we took an apartment when we--
INTERVIEWER 2: The
clothes that you
worked with were from
the homes of the Jews
or from the luggage of--
what?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: Yeah.
From--
INTERVIEWER 2: From what?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: From the
luggage that the Jews had.
INTERVIEWER 2: Yes.
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: From
the coats and everybody
had, uh, sheets and then the
towers, and all these things.
All these things,
they took away,
their personal
things and everything
that they took with them.
Many didn't know that
they go in a transport.
They were assembled in
this town, in Kolín,
and then they were told
where they are going.
And everything was
taken away from them.
INTERVIEWER 2: And
shipped to your camp?
MARTHA SARAFFIAN: No.
We had to go by train.
It was not far.
This town was Nymburk.
There were two towns, Kolín.
They were assembled in Kolín
and then shipped to Nymburk.
And from there, they were going
to the concentration camp.
And we went from Prague about
an hour by train to Nymburk
to pack these things from
these Jews from Czechoslovakia.
INTERVIEWER 2: What did you--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
After every transport.
INTERVIEWER 2: Arriving
to the place of transport,
what did you see and
what did you think?
What did you see there?
It was crowded--
MARTHA SARAFFIAN:
I was very upset
because I knew my mother
went the same way.
And all my family, my
mother's sister that I--
I loved very much,
and her children,
and to my father's family.
There were five
brothers left, all
died in concentration camps.
And my oldest cousins,
one of us and--